[DOC] Update metrics query doc with more examples (#4128)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/traceql/metrics-queries/_index.md

---
title: TraceQL metrics queries
menuTitle: TraceQL metrics queries
description: Learn about TraceQL metrics queries
weight: 600
keywords:
  - metrics query
  - TraceQL metrics
---

# TraceQL metrics queries

{{< docs/experimental product="TraceQL metrics" >}}

TraceQL metrics is an experimental feature in Grafana Tempo that creates metrics from traces.

Metric queries extend trace queries by applying a function to trace query results.
This powerful feature allows for ad-hoc aggregation of any existing TraceQL query by any dimension available in your traces, much in the same way that LogQL metric queries create metrics from logs.

Traces are a unique observability signal that contain causal relationships between the components in your system.
Do you want to know how many database calls across all systems are downstream of your application?
What services beneath a given endpoint are currently failing?
What services beneath an endpoint are currently slow? TraceQL metrics can answer all these questions by parsing your traces in aggregate.

> TraceQL metrics are powered by the TraceQL metrics API.

Author: ```suggestion
TraceQL metrics are powered by the [TraceQL metrics API](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/api_docs/#traceql-metrics).
```

![Metrics visualization in Grafana](/media/docs/tempo/metrics-explore-sample-2.4.png)

## Enable and use TraceQL metrics

You can use the TraceQL metrics in Grafana with any existing or new Tempo data source.
This capability is available in Grafana Cloud and Grafana (10.4 and newer).

> To enable TraceQL metrics, refer to [Configure TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/operations/traceql-metrics/) for more information.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. This might be clearer.  
```suggestion
To use TraceQL metrics, you need to enable them on your Tempo database.
Refer to [Configure TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/operations/traceql-metrics/) for more information.

From there, you can either query the TraceQL metrics API directly (for example, with `curl`) or using Grafana 
(recommended).
To run TraceQL metrics queries in Grafana, you need Grafana Cloud or Grafana 10.4 or later.
No extra configuration is needed. 
Use a Tempo data source that points to a Tempo database with TraceQL metrics enabled. 
```

## RED metrics, TraceQL, and PromQL

RED metrics represent:

- Rate, the number of requests per second
- Errors, the number of those requests that are failing
- Duration, the amount of time those requests take

For more information about RED method, refer to [The RED Method: how to instrument your services](/blog/2018/08/02/the-red-method-how-to-instrument-your-services/).

RED span metrics are created by the metrics-generator.

> TraceQL metrics can expose the same RED metrics that would otherwise be queried using PromQL.

Author: This is a very good clarification.

For more information on how to use TraceQL metrics to investigate issues, refer to [Solve problems with metrics queries](./solve-problems-metrics-queries).

> ## Exemplars

Reviewer: are traceql exemplars supported by grafana yet?

Author: Heds and I tried this, and they didn't appear to be. @hedss  may be able to give a better answer.

Author: If we keep this doc update for the Tempo 2.7 release, then there might be enough time for the Grafana support to be in place.
